---
title: 'Overview of VRP problems Part IV  _Open VRP problems_'
date: 2023-12-19
permalink: /posts/2023/12/blog-post-14/
tags:
  - Problem analysis
  - Code-sharing
---

The Open Vehicle Routing Problem (OVRP) is a variant of the Vehicle Routing Problem. In the OVRP, vehicles do not need to return to the original warehouse or starting point after completing service for the last customer. In this case, the final position of the vehicle can have several possibilities:

1. Location of the Last Customer: The vehicle can stay at the location of the last customer after completing its final delivery or service task.
2. Specific End Point: In some cases, the company may designate a specific end point, such as another warehouse, distribution center, or a secure parking facility.
3. Transit Point: If the vehicle is required for subsequent tasks or services, its final position might be the starting point or a transit station for the next task.
4. Vehicle Rental or Return Point: If the vehicle is rented, the final location might be a return point specified by the rental company.
5. Driver's Choice of Location: In some cases, the driver may have a degree of freedom to choose the vehicle's final parking location, especially after the end of the driver's workday.

If the vehicle simply stays at the location of the last customer, a virtual end point can be used in the OVRP model as the final destination of the vehicle, modifying the vehicle's end point constraint to this node. All distances to this node are assumed to be zero. Under this assumption, the location of the last customer served by the vehicle in the solution becomes the vehicle's final location.

In other cases, simply modify the vehicle's end point constraint to the intended destination. Other aspects of the model remain unchanged.

