---
title: 'Study Summary of 'Is ride-hailing a valuable means of transport in newly developed areas under TOD-oriented urbanization in China? ''
date: 2023-12-08
permalink: /cnposts/2023/12/blog-post-7/
tags:
  - Paper review
  - Ride-sourcing
  - Data mining
---

Recently, I've been thinking of conducting some analysis based on the data I have, so I reviewed some literature published in the Journal of Transport Geography in recent years. Today's organization focuses on one of those papers: Qiao, S., &#38; Yeh, A. G. O. (2021). Is ride-hailing a valuable means of transport in newly developed areas under TOD-oriented urbanization in China? Evidence from Chengdu City. <i>Journal of Transport Geography</i>, <i>96</i>. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2021.103183


## 0. Abstract

Despite considerable efforts by researchers to explore the complex relationship between urbanization and travel behavior, the preference for ride-hailing services in newly developed areas characterized by Transit-Oriented Development (TOD) remains unclear. Given the increasing global popularity of ride-hailing services and the significant changes in urban residents' travel behavior due to rapid urbanization, assessing the use and value of ride-hailing services in emerging suburban areas warrants attention. Therefore, this study employs spatial and temporal models to investigate the determinants of ride-hailing usage in city centers and newly developed areas. By analyzing the differences in ride-hailing behavior between city centers and new development areas, it was found that preferences for ride-hailing services are related to the differentiated socio-economic status formed under the backdrop of urbanization. In contrast, the impact of street design and destination accessibility on ride-hailing intensity in new development areas and city centers shows similar effects. Overall, this study validates that the potential value of ride-hailing services in newly developed urban areas is manifested in two aspects: travel for women and night-time travel. Therefore, ride-hailing services, embedded within the Mobility-as-a-Service (MaaS) conceptual framework, are expected to promote multimodal travel choices in newly developed areas and contribute to the future realization of sustainable, equitable, and efficient urban development.


## 1. Research Background

In the past decade, with the rapid development of technology, ride-hailing services have attracted widespread attention from researchers and planners. Existing literature reflects a diversity of studies on the value of ride-hailing services, including reducing energy consumption/carbon emissions, decreasing traffic loads/mileage, substituting/complementing public transport, competition in the taxi industry, and enhancing social equity. It has recently been discovered that ride-hailing services have the potential to serve as a complementary service to public transportation in certain urban fringe areas, where the cost of operating regular bus routes and building rail transit infrastructure is prohibitively high, and expanding the ride-hailing fleet poses a lower risk of causing traffic congestion. Embedding ride-hailing into the Mobility-as-a-Service (MaaS) conceptual framework can enhance the connectivity of existing public transportation networks in city centers.

Currently, the spatial organization forms of new development areas in the outskirts of Chinese cities primarily include new districts/towns and high-tech industrial parks/areas. This is because surplus capital can be shifted from the production sector to the construction of infrastructure and the built environment through centralized planning of new town construction and high-tech industrial development areas. With the planning and construction of new districts/towns and high-tech industrial parks/areas, urban transportation burdens intensify due to spatial mismatches in housing and job opportunities caused by industrial clustering and labor redistribution.

The development of these emerging areas often follows the TOD model. This raises a question: Could ride-hailing services become a valuable means of transport in newly developed areas? The significance of this question lies in providing a basis for future transportation policy formulation in the planning of new districts/towns during the urbanization process. Although many studies have explored the value of the impact of residents' travel behavior in urban fringe areas or the substitutive and complementary effects of ride-hailing services on public transportation, few have discussed the value of ride-hailing services from the perspective of differences in usage between new development areas and the inner city.

The main questions addressed in the article are:

1. What are the differences in socio-demographic characteristics, built environment, and functional area distribution between city center communities and new development communities?
2. How do these factors affect ride-hailing demand in different types of communities?
3. In new development areas, how to respond to changes in ride-hailing demand during different times of the day and week (such as morning peak, midday peak, midnight, and leisure days)?

## 2. Research Method

### 2.1 Research City
The article selects Chengdu as the subject of study and explains the reasons for choosing this city: one is the scale of urban development, and the other is the significant volume of ride-hailing activity.

### 2.2 Research Unit
The study units chosen are street offices (街道办), and an explanation is provided on what constitutes a street office.

### 2.3 Measurement of Ride-Hailing Scores

The dependent variable used for regression analysis is Ride-Hailing Usage Intensity, represented by a proxy indicator, namely the ride-hailing score. The article calculates this indicator with the following formula:

$$
Ride-Hailing Density = \frac{\text{Trips starting within a neighborhood}}{\text{Area of a neighborhood}}
$$

$$
Ride-Hailing Score = \frac{RD-Min(RD)}{Max(RD)-Min(RD)} * 100
$$

Ride-hailing density is obtained by dividing the number of orders generated by a community by the area of the community. Hence, it indicates how many ride-hailing orders per square meter are generated at the community level. The choice of area over population as a metric is because ride-hailing service is a mode of mobility used by the people in a place, not by the population residing in the area. Then, the max-min normalization method is applied to convert ride-hailing density into a 0-100 scoring system, i.e., the ride-hailing score, directly reflecting the differences in ride-hailing demand between communities.

The experimental data used is from the DiDi Gaia Project in Chengdu.

### 2.4 Measurement of Destination Accessibility

The article selects the shortest distance to different types of city services as the criterion for measuring accessibility. Researchers obtained the city's POI (Point of Interest) data through the Amap API, totaling 1,037,630 entries. The article discusses some limitations of POI data, as stated in the original text: Due to data limitations, POIs can only represent point information and have high redundancy. For example, a hospital area includes medical and healthcare category points, catering service category points, and transportation facility category points. For this area, one category (medical and healthcare) determines the land use of the area (hospital), not the other POI types (catering services or transportation facilities).

To address this issue, the article uses a two-step method combining decisive POI categories and word embedding methods to divide the study area into different types of urban service areas. Notably, the city area in the article is based on traffic analysis areas of the main road network, with a total of 4,140 small areas, the median area being 0.1 square kilometers. The reason for choosing traffic analysis areas is that they provide a more detailed and accurate spatial granularity for extracting urban services.

Word2vec is a word embedding algorithm that can reclassify POI descriptions into categories suitable for human natural semantic understanding. The specific process is as follows:

- First, the 1,037,630 POIs obtained from the Amap API were reclassified through a trained word embedding algorithm.
- Then, decisive point categories (hospitals, parks, universities, airport locations, and train stations) representing regional information were extracted and marked as the respective service types of the target area.
- Next, based on the feature vectors of the supportive POIs obtained from the Word2vec reclassification, the remaining areas were automatically clustered into five categories using the k-nearest neighbors (KNN) algorithm, adequately representing the spatial distribution of urban service areas.


Finally, by removing residential and undeveloped area categories, seven types of urban services were identified, including shopping centers, business districts, work areas, parks and tourist attractions, universities, hospitals, and airports.

### 2.5 Measurement of Land Use Diversity

The article uses the method of land use mix entropy to measure the diversity of land use.

$$
LUM = -\frac{\sum_{i=1}^{n} p_i \ln(p_i)}{\ln(n)}
$$

The closer the above index is to 1, the more significant the diversity of land use; conversely, it indicates more orderly land use.

### 2.6 Other Influencing Factors

The dependent variable is the ride-hailing score, with independent variables including regional identification (whether it is a new area), urban service accessibility, socio-demographic attributes (including population age level, gender, and income level), and built environment. Notably, socio-demographic attributes are from open-source data published in a journal: Michael Bauer Research (MBR). Frye, C., Wright, D. J., Nordstrand, E., Terborgh, C., & Foust, J. (2018). Using Classified and Unclassified Land Cover Data to Estimate the Footprint of Human Settlement. Data Science Journal, 17, 20. doi: 10.5334/dsj-2018-020.

## 3. Results Analysis and Discussion

The article conducts descriptive statistical analysis of various indicators (analyzed in three scenarios: overall, within the city, and in emerging areas) and analyzes the spatiotemporal characteristics of travel during different periods (morning peak, daytime, and nighttime).

A t-test was conducted between the city center and new areas for various indicators. The study shows statistically significant differences between city centers and newly developed communities in socio-demographic characteristics and the convenience of accessing city services. However, the differences between them in terms of highway density, secondary road density, and the presence of subway stations are not significant. This demonstrates that the development of new areas is guided by TOD strategies, and their infrastructure construction density is comparable to city centers in terms of road networks and subway infrastructure.

Linear regression analysis was used to examine the impact of socio-demographic attributes, built environment, and urban service feasibility on ride-hailing scores. Regression analyses were conducted for the overall, within the city, and emerging areas separately. Additionally, the impact of travel in different time periods in emerging areas was analyzed. Specifically, the influencing factors of travel during morning peak, midday peak, daytime, and nighttime were divided.


## 4. My Brief Summary

+ This article focuses on ride-hailing service usage preferences in new urban areas constructed with TOD as the guiding principle.
+ The article employs spatial and temporal models to study the determinants of ride-hailing usage in city centers and newly built areas.
+ The study finds that the potential value of ride-hailing services in newly built urban areas is manifested in: women's travel and nighttime travel.
+ The article presents a viewpoint for future use: <i>Recent research indicates that ride-hailing services have the potential to serve as a complementary service to public transportation in some urban fringe areas, as operating regular bus routes and constructing rail transit infrastructure in these areas are very costly, and expanding the ride-hailing fleet poses a lower risk of causing traffic congestion. Embedding ride-hailing into the MaaS conceptual framework can expand the connectivity of existing public transportation networks in city centers.</i>
+ A key aspect of the article is the use of word embedding to address inherent issues with POI data, a point that can be applied to other studies involving POIs.
+ The focus on new urban areas is articulated thus: As new districts/towns and high-tech industrial parks/areas are planned and constructed, urban transportation burdens intensify due to spatial mismatches in housing and job opportunities caused by industrial clustering and labor redistribution. Therefore, even though these areas are designed under public transportation-oriented development, will ride-hailing services become a valuable means of transport in newly developed areas? Due to the huge potential of on-demand transportation tools in integrating multimodal transportation and mitigating traffic congestion and carbon emissions caused by the rapid spread of global urbanization, empirical evidence is crucial.
+ Overall, the article is not significantly different in terms of methodology or data. The key lies in finding a unique angle and dividing the analysis into different time periods with fine granularity.



**References**
1. <div class="csl-entry">Qiao, S., &#38; Yeh, A. G. O. (2021). Is ride-hailing a valuable means of transport in newly developed areas under TOD-oriented urbanization in China? Evidence from Chengdu City. <i>Journal of Transport Geography</i>, <i>96</i>. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2021.103183</div>


*Read [CN version](https://yqwang96.github.io/cnposts/2023/12/blog-post-7/) of this post*
------