---
title: 'Study Summary of "How do Ships Pass Through L-shaped Turnings in the Singapore Strait?"'
date: 2023-11-24
permalink: /posts/2023/11/blog-post-5/
tags:
  - Paper review
  - Maritime traffic safety
  - Data mining
---

Today, I continued to explore the research conducted by my senior colleague, with the following paper details: Kang, L., Meng, Q., Zhou, C., & Gao, S. (2019). How do ships pass through L-shaped turnings in the Singapore strait? <b><i>Ocean Engineering</i></b>, <i>182</i>, 329–342. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2019.04.033

This study mainly analyzes how ships navigate through the L-shaped waters of the Malacca Strait in Singapore, based on the AIS data of ships. It involves processing of anomalous data and filtering through irregular waters.

## Abstract
The value of Automatic Identification System (AIS) data coexists with data noise, and an effective method for noise elimination plays a crucial role in data mining. In this study, we first address the denoising of 43 million large vessel AIS data entries in 15 segments of the Singapore Strait, which include ship location, speed, and course data, and are examined and corrected by the proposed Method-I. Additionally, this paper develops the Method-II based on the winding number to select data within irregular restricted waters. Using these data, this paper specially designs a search and cut Method-III to filter ships that pass through "L" shaped turns (two or more adjacent segments forming a curved passage).

According to actual AIS data from the Singapore Strait, ship speed generally follows a normal distribution within a certain range. Comparing ship speeds across three types of water areas (i.e., segments, "L" shaped turns, and the entire strait) reveals that speeds in "L" shaped turns are more normally distributed than in segments and the entire strait. In the Singapore Strait, speeds in "L" shaped turns decrease by about 5.26% to 14.4%. Moreover, this paper's Method-IV can identify the ship deceleration process from extensive nautical data, indicating that speed changes in "L" shaped turns are minimally related to ship type or length. However, it was found that the longer the ship, (1) the longer the deceleration time, (2) the smaller the acceleration, and (3) the smaller the rate of course change.

## Research Background

The Singapore Strait is a relatively narrow and busy waterway traversed by various types of ships, including ultra-large crude carriers, ferries, container ships, and tankers. Extremely crucial, it carries about a third of the world's trade goods, connecting over 120 countries. Given its significance, researching ship traffic problems in the Singapore Strait is of practical importance, providing maritime managers with useful solutions to effectively manage strait traffic and the operations of Singapore's ports. The strait is composed of many segments, forming several "L" shaped turns. For instance, there are four such turns in the middle of the strait. Compared to straight segments, ships traversing "L" shaped turns often exhibit different characteristics, such as deceleration, acceleration, and course changes. As each turn has different navigational conditions, the navigation behavior of ships varies, affecting the strait's navigability. Therefore, understanding these characteristics is crucial for the global logistics industry, especially for such an important waterway as the Singapore Strait.

## Research Objectives
After extensive literature searches, the authors found a current lack of research on ship traffic problems in "L" shaped turns and how to utilize vast AIS data to address these issues. This paper aims to explore the following four core issues of ship traffic in the Singapore Strait from the perspective of large-scale AIS data:

1. How the distribution of ship speeds affects the navigational capacity of the strait, and whether there is a specific distribution pattern of ship speeds in the Singapore Strait.
2. Whether "L" shaped turns in the Singapore Strait significantly impact ship navigation, with an attempt to quantify these impacts, especially in terms of acceleration/deceleration and course changes.
3. Whether different types and sizes of ships exhibit distinct navigational characteristics when passing through "L" shaped turns, proposing a practical method to identify these characteristics.
4. The influence of "L" shaped turns on the navigational capacity of the strait, demonstrated through basic traffic maps of ships in the Singapore Strait.

## Research Methodology
### Data Selection Step 1: AIS Data Check for Ships
Complete ship AIS data should include at least the following information: ship ID, type, location, course, speed, heading, draft, navigational status, bow dimension, stern dimension, portside and starboard dimensions. The first two pieces of information are used for ship identification, the third to sixth indicate navigational parameters, the seventh and eighth provide environmental context of the strait, and the last four describe the physical attributes of the ship. However, for this study, three important AIS pieces of information related to each ship (ship ID, location, and speed with intervals of less than 10 seconds) are sufficient. Different filtering methods were employed for various dimensions of abnormal data:

1. For abnormal latitude and longitude data, the normal data points and times before and after the anomaly were selected for differential calculation;
2. For abnormal speed data, the authors first fitted the normal data to obtain a linear fit of ship speeds in the water, and then calculated the speed through integration;
3. For abnormal heading data, the same treatment method as for abnormal speed data was adopted.

### Data Selection Step 2: Method Based on Winding Number
Focusing on the "L" shaped turning areas of the Singapore Strait, the AIS data of interest must be located within these restricted areas. To select data within specific areas, a method called "Winding Number" was used. Based on the concept of winding number, it determines whether a point lies within an irregular closed path. Simply put, if a curve does not encircle a point, then the winding number of that point is zero, indicating it's not inside the closed curve.

### Data Selection Step 3: Filtering Ships Passing Through Two L-shaped Segments
To address ship traffic issues in the Singapore Strait, it is necessary to filter ships that pass through two or more adjacent segments (i.e., "L" shaped turns). Therefore, a "Search and Cut" method (Method-III) was proposed for this purpose. The core of this method is to identify ships in AIS data that pass through two specific segments, and to segment this data for analysis. This is because ships' behavior in "L" shaped turns may differ from that in straight segments, such as slowing down or changing course during turns.

### Ship Speeds in the Singapore Strait and Through "L" Turns
Based on a week's AIS data after cleaning (October 1 to October 7, 2013), the ship speeds and their distribution in the Singapore Strait were analyzed. Specifically, data from ships passing through four "L" shaped turns were selected and compared with overall data from the strait.

1. From the entire strait's perspective, linear models, quadratic models, polynomial nonlinear models, and Gaussian models were used for data fitting. These were evaluated using $R^2$ and RMSE, with the Gaussian model outperforming the others.
2. From the perspective of L-shaped turns, ship speeds do not completely follow a normal distribution, but are considered normally distributed within a certain range.
3. Comparing segments with "L" shaped turns, most segment speeds do not follow a normal distribution, such as segments W5, E8, E9, E14, and E15, except for segments W1 and W2.

### Ships Navigating in "L" Shaped Turns
This section explores the speed changes of ships in "L" shaped turns and the corresponding processes. Additionally, based on AIS data and interpolation data, the implied navigational rules of ships in "L" shaped turns are revealed.

1. When ships pass through "L" shaped turns, the average speed downstream is lower than upstream. This indicates that ships generally slow down in "L" shaped turns, causing the ship data in these turns to follow a normal distribution.
2. Based on the observed deceleration process, discussions revolved around "How long does deceleration take? How much does speed decrease? How much does the course change? Is the deceleration process related to the size/type of the ship?"
     + Firstly, Method-IV was proposed to find the start and end times of speed changes for each ship passing through the "L" shaped turn. The main idea of Method-IV is to find the highest speed of the ship upstream of the "L" shaped turn and the lowest speed of that ship downstream. If the difference between the highest and lowest speeds exceeds a threshold, then the process is considered deceleration. Additionally, this deceleration process is checked for course changes to ensure that the selected ships indeed passed through the "L" shaped turn.
     + Based on this method, it was found that, disregarding environmental factors like weather, visibility, waves, etc., the longer the ship, the longer the deceleration time; the smaller the deceleration magnitude, the smaller the rate of course change. Notably, the extent of speed change is not significantly related to the length of the ship, indirectly indicating that navigators tend to slow down to a certain extent through "L" shaped turns.

### Ship Traffic Capacity in "L" Shaped Turns
The speed-density (or flow-density) relationship is considered the foundation of traffic flow theory. Considering that ships decelerate when passing through "L" shaped turns, this section therefore explores the speed-density-flow chart for ships, accompanied by four calibration models. By calibrating the basic chart, the traffic capacity of each "L" shaped turn can be estimated.

Large vessel AIS data contains numerous observation records, each recording the navigational information of ships in specific areas. Let time $t$ be the index of observation records. In the strait, ships often change course, not always sailing in a straight line. Therefore, calculating the spatial average speed is difficult and inaccurate. Hence, we calculate the average speed of ship traffic in specific "L" shaped turns during the observation time as the average speed of all ships, and density as the number of ships in the area during the observation time divided by the length of the L-shaped turn. Calibration was subsequently performed.

## Conclusion
In summary, the conclusions of the study are as follows:

1. The speed of ships in "L" shaped turns follows a normal distribution within a certain range. However, in a single segment (either upstream or downstream waters), this normal distribution is not yet clear.
2. In the Singapore Strait, the speed of ships passing through "L" shaped turns decreases by about 5.26%-14.4%. Interestingly, the change in ship speed during the "L" turn (as determined by Method-IV) is not related to the type or length of the ship.
3. The length of the ship affects the deceleration time, rate of deceleration, and rate of course change. This indicates that the length of the ship will affect the traffic of ships in restricted waters.
4. In the Singapore Strait, ships decelerate through each "L" shaped turn, leading to an increase in the saturated ship traffic flow.

The main contribution of this study to the literature involves the application of the above findings by strait management authorities and Singapore Strait pilots to help improve traffic in the strait. For example, understanding the relationship between ship density and ship speed can further manage traffic flow. This is also the first time a methodological framework based on AIS data has been developed to investigate the navigational behavior of ships passing through the "L" shaped turns in the Singapore Strait. The results not only provide an operational profile of "L-shaped waters" but also demonstrate the potential value of AIS-based data processing methods. Furthermore, the results and policy suggestions (such as setting speed limits in the Singapore Strait) could support the adequacy or improvement of existing policies and be transferred to other waters with similar traffic conditions.

## Personal Summary
This article feels somewhat similar to research methods commonly used in the field of Human Mobility, much like studies in the SR journal. It is more about analyzing patterns from data, focusing on revealing certain regularities, without any innovation in methodology. If one were to speak grandly, the contribution of this study is as the authors state. But in reality, is it effectively usable? Who cares?

**References**
1. Kang, L., Meng, Q., Zhou, C., &#38; Gao, S. (2019). How do ships pass through L-shaped turnings in the Singapore strait? <b><i>Ocean Engineering</i></b>, <i>182</i>, 329–342. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2019.04.033

*Read [CN version](https://yqwang96.github.io/cnposts/2023/11/blog-post-5/) of this post*
------