---
title: 'Study summary of ‘Portraying ride-hailing mobility using multi-day trip order data: A case study of Beijing, China'
date: 2023-12-15
permalink: /posts/2023/12/blog-post-10/
tags:
  - Paper review
  - Ride-sourcing
  - Data mining
---

My research is designed to use data spanning multiple days, and I noticed that the title of this article specifically emphasizes its use of multi-day data. Therefore, I'm interested in understanding how this article highlights the feature of multi-day data. The information of the paper is as follows: He, Z. (2021). Portraying ride-hailing mobility using multi-day trip order data: A case study of Beijing, China. <b><i>Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice</i></b>, <i>146</i>(January), 152–169. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2021.01.017

## 0. Abstract

In the era of mobile internet, ride-hailing, as an emerging mode of transportation that connects private car drivers with passengers through online platforms, has become widely popular globally. Despite the extensive attention ride-hailing has received from both practice and theory, the understanding of it remains relatively limited due to the scarcity of relevant data. This paper presents for the first time the multi-day trip order data of ride-hailing drivers, using it to describe the mobility of ride-hailing in the Beijing area of China. By analyzing from both regional and driver perspectives, it not only helps in understanding the spatio-temporal distribution of ride-hailing demand but also depicts the preferences of drivers when providing ride-hailing services. The findings include observations on how city residents utilize ride-hailing services at different times and the correlation between the activity space of ride-hailing drivers and their working hours. These insights are significant for a deeper understanding of ride-hailing activities, predicting ride-hailing demand, constructing ride-hailing driver preference models, and the management of ride-hailing services.


## 1. Research Background
Ride-hailing services, as an emerging mode of transportation, have attracted significant user engagement. Many studies have been conducted to understand the services provided by full-time or part-time drivers and the usage habits of passengers. These studies largely rely on three types of data sources: survey data, self-collected operational data, and operational data published by TNCs. These sources greatly influence the outcomes of the research.

Survey studies are one of the most crucial tools in existing ride-hailing research, offering deep insights into the characteristics of ride-hailing, especially in analyzing individual choice preferences from a micro perspective. While surveys can reveal many potential details, such as intentions in service selection, they have limitations due to high costs and the possibility of respondents' answers not aligning with their actual behavior.

Consequently, researchers have adopted more observation-based data to explore ride-hailing activities.

+ <i>Some researchers sent virtual requests to ride-hailing platforms via computer programs, recording the responses of nearby ride-hailing vehicles. This data was later used to assess the spatio-temporal characteristics of ride-hailing services in San Francisco.</i>
+ <i>Some researchers personally drove for ride-hailing services in Denver, USA, collecting trip data and passenger feedback. They not only discovered that ride-hailing usage led to an 83% increase in vehicle kilometers traveled but also investigated the actual earnings of ride-hailing drivers, considering factors like waiting time without passengers and drivers' residence locations.</i>
+ <i>Some researchers developed a web crawler tool on Uber's mobile platform to collect ride-hailing data and analyzed several aspects, such as the market share of ride-hailing services and the distribution of origins and destinations.</i>

Ride-hailing platforms are often reluctant to share their data with researchers or the public. Based on the limited available data, people have gained a more comprehensive understanding of ride-hailing behavior and its related human mobility.

Through survey data and ride-hailing operational data, existing studies have gained deeper insights into ride-hailing. However, the data currently used for analysis remain limited, impacting our comprehensive understanding of this emerging mode of transportation and its societal impacts.

This study, by analyzing multi-day activity data of ride-hailing **drivers**, not only deepens our understanding of the spatio-temporal dynamics of urban ride-hailing demand but also portrays the behavioral characteristics of drivers providing ride-hailing services. It describes ride-hailing activities in more detail from two perspectives: **regional mobility** and **multi-day driver behavior**, thoroughly exploring the temporal variations of ride-hailing trips, spatial mobility, and the spatio-temporal characteristics of ride-hailing driver behavior. These findings are valuable for understanding ride-hailing activities, predicting ride-hailing demand, constructing ride-hailing driver preference models, and managing ride-hailing services.


## 2. Analytical Framework

### 2.1 Symbol Explanation

The symbols related to ride-hailing trips are defined as follows: Let $i = 1, 2, ..., I$ represent drivers, with $I$ being the total number of drivers. $TR_{ij} = \{O_{ij}, D_{ij}\}$ denotes the $j$th trip of driver $i$, where $j = 1, 2, ..., J$ and $J$ is the total number of trips for driver $i$. $O_{ij}$ and $D_{ij}$ refer to the starting and ending points of a trip, respectively. For simplicity, $Ξ$ is used to represent O or D. Consequently, the information for a trip's start or end point can be expressed as $Ξ_{ij} = \{t^Ξ_{ij}, lon^Ξ_{ij}, lat^Ξ_{ij}\}$, where $t^Ξ_{ij}$ denotes the time when the trip starts (i.e., passenger boarding) or ends (i.e., passenger alighting); $lon^Ξ_{ij}$ and $lat^Ξ_{ij}$ are the longitude and latitude of the passenger's boarding and alighting locations. For each trip, we can calculate its duration $T_{ij}$ and displacement $L_{ij}$ as follows:

$$
\begin{cases}
T_{ij} = t^D_{ij} - t^O_{ij}\\
L_{ij} = dis((lon^D_{ij}, lat^D_{ij}), (lon^O_{ij}, lat^O_{ij}))
\end{cases}
$$

where, $dis(·)$ is a function that calculates the distance between two points on the Earth's surface.

### 2.2 Data Description
+ Data provided by Beijing's largest TNC, including a week's trip order information of 138,138 private car drivers. These drivers completed a total of 5,289,045 ride-hailing trips (orders) during one week in August 2018. After excluding trips with $T_{ij} ≤ 0$, we obtained 5,041,455 valid trips (95.3%).

+ From a regional perspective, analyzing the area-level ride-hailing data, i.e., passenger transfers between areas, can reveal the dynamics of travel demand.
+ From the driver's perspective, analyzing multi-day trip data of ride-hailing drivers can better describe their behavior and help understand the supply-side labor market.

### 2.3 Regional Perspective
+ Temporal Variation of Ride-Hailing Trips: Analyzed the daily travel demand in the dataset, and the demand for each hour of the day.
+ Spatial Mobility of Ride-Hailing Trips: Divided the areas of Beijing into spatial segments and then calculated the grids into which vehicles fall based on their coordinates. A threshold was defined, where if a grid's hourly trip volume exceeds this threshold, it is defined as a dense origin or destination grid. Based on this division, heat maps were drawn for the morning peak, evening peak, and midnight.
+ Multi-day Repetitiveness of Regional Origins or Destinations: The multi-day repetitiveness of area intensity (i.e., the number of origins and destinations) is closely related to ride-hailing activity prediction. The paper measures the coefficient of variation of the number of origins or destinations that fall into grid (x,y) within a time interval k on all workdays. The results show that the coefficient of variation values are between 0.15 and 0.25 for most times, indicating that the number of origins or destinations within a region at the same time on each workday does not vary dramatically.
+ Area Classification: Classified urban areas based on the time when peaks of origin or destination numbers occur. A sliding time window was set to calculate the trip volume in each grid for every time window, finding the peak value. The peak interval should first be greater than the trip volume of all other intervals, and secondly, it should be greater than a certain multiple of the average trip volume. In the paper, the length of the sliding time window was 5 hours, and the multiple was 2.

### 2.4 Driver Perspective
+ Empirical cumulative distribution of the number of orders completed by drivers: Most drivers are part-time, with only a small portion working full-time.
+ The tail of the log-log curve of trip time and displacement for orders follows a power-law distribution, indicating the occasional existence of long-distance trips.
+ Temporal Feature Description: Identifying which time periods are preferred by drivers for providing ride-hailing services.
+ Spatial Feature Description: Using hierarchical clustering methods to aggregate all start and end points of a driver's trips. The input is a driver's start and end point location data for a week, and the metric for measuring the distance between two points is the distance on the Earth's surface. Additionally, the effect of cluster distance on clustering results was understood. Cluster distance roughly indicates the activity density of a driver in a cluster, i.e., the preference for accepting long or short trips. The larger the cluster distance, the lower the activity density in a cluster, meaning a tendency towards short trip demands.
  + Most drivers are unwilling to go beyond 10 kilometers from their regular cruising area (i.e., the largest cluster).
  + Some drivers work intensively in space (corresponding to peak drivers), while others work more relaxedly;
  + The correlation between working hours and activity space is roughly linearly positive, i.e., an increase in working hours leads to an expansion of the driver's activity space.

## 3. Personal Summary
+ This paper does not adopt any particularly profound methods, mostly conducting basic analyses. However, even from a basic analysis perspective, some interesting results were found, and the graphics are well-presented and worth learning from.
+ The methods used in the paper include: period travel volume statistics, spatial area travel volume statistics, coefficient of variation, spectral clustering, spatio-temporal maps, empirical cumulative distribution, and log-log curves.

**References**
1. He, Z. (2021). Portraying ride-hailing mobility using multi-day trip order data: A case study of Beijing, China. **_Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice_**, _146_ (January), 152–169. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2021.01.017


*Read [CN version](https://yqwang96.github.io/cnposts/2023/12/blog-post-10/) of this post*
------