---
title: 'Study Summary of ‘Comparative Analysis of Usage Patterns and Underlying  Determinants for Ride-hailing and Traditional Taxi Services: A  Chicago Case Study’'
date: 2023-12-09
permalink: nposts/2023/12/blog-post-9/
tags:
  - Paper review
  - Ride-sourcing
  - Influencing factors
---

Recently, I read a study about ride-sourcing and taxi services as I was interested in comparing these with car-sharing services. The details of the paper are as follows: Wang, Z., Zhang, Y., Jia, B., &#38; Gao, Z. (2024). Comparative Analysis of Usage Patterns and Underlying Determinants for Ride-hailing and Traditional Taxi Services: A Chicago Case Study. <b><i>Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice</i></b>, <i>179</i>. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2023.103912

## 0. Abstract

With the rapid global expansion of smartphone-based ride-sourcing services, traditional taxi industries are facing unprecedented challenges. This study, taking Chicago as a case study, delves into a comparative analysis of ride-sourcing and traditional taxis, both of which provide door-to-door transportation services. We examined how socio-demographic characteristics and urban land use affect the usage patterns of these services at different times and locations. A local regression model known as Geographically and Temporally Weighted Regression (GTWR) was primarily used, capable of capturing the spatio-temporal non-stationarity among variables. Four GTWR models were developed to predict average hourly trips for ride-sourcing and taxis in Chicago's community areas on weekdays and weekends, each model exhibiting an R^2 value exceeding 0.98. Non-stationarity tests indicated significant local variation in all variables, highlighting the importance of using the GTWR model to explore spatio-temporal effects. Spatial Error Models (SEM) and Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) models were also established as global regression models for comparison and reference. Cluster analysis was employed to demonstrate the differences between global and local regression models. To further understand the distinct usage patterns of ride-sourcing and taxis, we analyzed the coefficients of spatio-temporal variations in the GTWR models. The findings revealed several interesting observations, such as the strong trip-generating capacity of the population in the southern part of Chicago, a positive attitude towards taxis but an unclear stance on ride-sourcing among Caucasians, differing attitudes of young people towards taxi services on weekdays versus weekends, and the inverse relationship between public transit and taxis or ride-sourcing in certain areas. Based on these key findings, we proposed several planning and operational recommendations, such as developing mobile applications, implementing price-related strategies, strengthening collaboration with local businesses, constructing multimodal transportation systems, formulating clear strategies for different customer segments, and offering additional services.


## 1. Research Background

Since the emergence of Uber and Lyft, the traditional taxi industry has experienced significant losses in various aspects, including market share, revenue, workforce, and assets.

Due to their convenience, ride-sourcing services have rapidly gained market dominance. However, these services also face certain levels of skepticism and criticism, such as fluctuations in supply and pricing, increased traffic congestion, and market disruption. In contrast, traditional taxis are considered more reliable, as they are operated by professional, full-time drivers, rather than part-timers. Additionally, traditional taxis have a more stable pricing structure, making them perceived as a more stable and reliable system. Traditional taxis can be hailed on the streets, while ride-sourcing relies on platform-based matching algorithms, potentially leading to shortcomings in response speed and operational autonomy. Therefore, some believe it's premature to declare the decline of the traditional taxi industry, as ride-sourcing saturation could lead to various negative effects. Hence, it is necessary to create a fair competitive environment where taxis and ride-sourcing services can compete.

To promote the coexistence and complementarity of these two services, this paper aims to understand the different ways people use these services. **<i>The article then describes how this goal is achieved, outlining the socio-demographic and land use data used, as well as the analytical methods. It focuses on spatial and temporal analysis, explaining the importance of these two dimensions.</i>** 

**<i>It also provides a detailed introduction to the trip data and methods used in the study, akin to the description in the Contribution section.</i>**


## 2. Research Details

### 2.1 Study Area and Data
+ Research City: Chicago, USA
+ Research Data:
  + Ride-sourcing and taxi data sourced from the [Chicago Data Portal](https://data.cityofchicago.org/)
    + Time Range: May 1, 2019 - May 30, 2019
    + Data Quantity: 1,139,341 valid taxi trip records, 8,309,033 valid ride-sourcing data records
    + After introducing the data fields and preprocessing, the average travel distance and costs in the data were analyzed.
  + Socio-demographic data sourced from community data snapshots
  + Land use data sourced from OpenStreetMap

### 2.2 Research Methods
+ Multicollinearity Test

$$VIF = \frac{1}{1 - R_i^2}$$

+ Spatial Autocorrelation

$$
I = \frac{N \sum_{i=1}^{N}\sum_{j=1}^{N}w_{ij}(x_i - \bar{x})(x_j - \bar{x})}{\sum_{i=1}^{N}\sum_{j=1}^{N}w_{ij} \cdot \sum_{i=1}^{N}(x_i - \bar{x})^2}
$$

+ Spatial Error Model (SEM)

The SEM model can be detailed as follows:

$$
Y_i = X_iβ + λW \delta + μ
$$

In the above equation, $i (i = 1, 2, 3...)$ represents the spatial analysis unit, i.e., the index of the study area. $Y_i$ and $X_i$ are the dependent and independent variables at the $i$th location, respectively, and $β$ represents a set of parameter values. In the SEM model, errors are split into random error and spatially structured error. The spatial error coefficient $λ$, the spatial matrix $W$, and the error term $\delta$ together constitute the spatially structured error. The random error $μ$ is independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.) and is not explained by the SEM model. In this study, the spatial matrix W is a 0-1 matrix constructed using the 4-nearest neighbor algorithm.


+ GTWR Model

Compared to the traditional Geographically Weighted Regression model, the GTWR model incorporates time non-stationarity into the weighting matrix to integrate spatio-temporal information. The general structure of the GTWR model can be described as follows:

$$
Y_i = β_0(u_i, v_i, t_i) + \sum_k β_k(u_i, v_i, t_i)X_{ik} + ε_i
$$

where $i(i = 1, 2, 3...)$ is the index of each observation; $(u_i, v_i, t_i)$ represent the spatio-temporal coordinates of the $i$th observation, denoting longitude, latitude, and time respectively. $X_{ik}$ is the $k$th independent variable of the $i$th observation. $β_0(u_i, v_i, t_i)$ represents the intercept; $β_k(u_i, v_i, t_i)$ represents a set of parameter values. In this study, the dependent variable $Y_i$ is the hourly usage of taxi or ride-hailing services on weekdays or weekends. The estimation of $β_k(u_i, v_i, t_i)$ can be expressed as follows:

$$
\hat{β}(u_i, v_i, t_i) = [X^T W(u_i, v_i, t_i)X]^{-1}X^T W(u_i, v_i, t_i)Y
$$

where $W(u_i, v_i, t_i) = diag(a_{i1}, a_{i2}, ..., a_{in})$, and $n$ is the number of observations. The elements in the matrix $a_{ij} (1 \leq j \leq n)$ are the spatio-temporal weights calculated through a specific kernel function, for which this study selects the following Gaussian function:

$$
a_{ij} = exp[-0.5*(\frac{d^{ST}{ij}}{h_{ST}})^2]
$$

$d^{ST}_{ij}$ is the spatio-temporal distance between observations $i$ and $j$. $h_{ST}$ is a positive parameter known as the spatio-temporal bandwidth. 

Let $d^S$ be the spatial distance, and $d^T$ be the temporal distance; then the spatio-temporal distance $d^{ST}$ can be represented as:

$$
d^{ST} = d^S \oplus d^T
$$

$\oplus$ can represent different functions. The study uses the following function used by Wu et al. (2014):

$$
d^{ST}_{ij} = \begin{cases}
  \lambda d^{S}_{ij} + (1 - \lambda) d^{T}_{ij} + 2\sqrt{\lambda(1 - \lambda)d^{S}_{ij}d^{T}_{ij}\cos(\xi)}, \text{ if } t_j < t_i; \\
  \infty, \text{ if } t_j > t_i.
\end{cases}
$$

where $t_i$ and $t_j$ are the times of observations $i$ and $j$. $\lambda$ is a proportionality factor to balance different influences, as spatial distance and temporal distance are measured in different units. The parameter $ξ ∈ [0,π]$ is introduced to control the interaction of spatial and temporal effects. Substituting equation (8) into equation (6), we get the following expression for $a_{ij}$:

$$
a_{ij} = \begin{cases} 
\exp\left[-0.5*\left(\frac{\lambda d^{S}_{ij} + (1 - \lambda)d^{T}_{ij} + 2\sqrt{\lambda(1 - \lambda)}d^{S}_{ij}d^{T}_{ij}\cos(\xi)}{h_{ST}}\right)^2\right], & \text{if } t_i > t_j; \\
0, & \text{if } t_i < t_j.
\end{cases}
$$

Observations are hourly trip volumes, $d^T$ is an integer between 0 and 23 representing the time difference between observations $i$ and $j$ within 24 hours, and $d^S$ is the number of miles between two areas. The optimal bandwidth can be selected based on the minimum Cross-Validation (CV) value.

$$
CV(h_{ST}) = \sum_i (Y_i - \hat{Y}i(h{ST}))^2
$$


### 2.3 Model Construction

Initially, the analysis was conducted separately for weekdays and weekends, dividing each day into 24 time periods. The average number of trips for ride-hailing and taxis during each period was calculated, serving as the dependent variable. Consequently, four GTWR models were constructed: ride-hailing on weekdays, ride-hailing on weekends, taxis on weekdays, and taxis on weekends. Then, an F-test was used to compare the GTWR models with OLS and SEM models.

## 3. Personal Summary
+ Initially, upon seeing the title of this article, I felt it was somewhat meaningless. From my perspective, the advantages of ride-hailing seemed to have completely overshadowed taxis. However, the article also mentioned that taxi drivers are full-time professionals, which is more common than in ride-hailing. The more fixed cost of taxis makes them seem like a more reliable mode of transportation. Therefore, analyzing the travel patterns of these two transportation methods is necessary.
+ Regarding the research methods and data used in this paper, they appear to be quite conventional.

**References:**
1. <div class="csl-entry">Wang, Z., Zhang, Y., Jia, B., & Gao, Z. (2024). Comparative Analysis of Usage Patterns and Underlying Determinants for Ride-hailing and Traditional Taxi Services: A Chicago Case Study. <i>Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice</i>, <i>179</i>. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2023.103912</div>

*Read [CN version](https://yqwang96.github.io/cnposts/2023/12/blog-post-9/) of this post*
------
