---
title: '[Talk summary] Jensen Huang at Stanford Business School'
date: 2024-05-14
permalink: /posts/2024/05/blog-post-19/
tags:
  - Talk summary
---

Jensen Huang primarily discussed NVIDIA's development philosophy over the past few years, as well as the role he has played as CEO in the company's growth. Finally, during the Q&A session, he answered some questions from the audience. Since the audience was mainly Stanford Business School students, the focus was on the company's development journey rather than technical content.

------
*Read [CN version](https://yqwang96.github.io/cnposts/2024/05/blog-post-19/) of this post*

### Key Points

1. **First Principles**

When asked, "What technologies based on current AI could change the world?" Jensen Huang didn’t give a direct answer. Instead, he referred to first principles, asking, "What can AI help us with?" AI can help us understand things, such as images and texts, which has led to technologies like text-to-image generation.

Since AI can understand these things, the question becomes: Can AI understand genes and proteins? If AI can understand genes and proteins, it would have a huge impact on drug manufacturing, medicine, and the development of humanity as a whole.

2. **Create Technology and Create Market**

In the early days of NVIDIA, the company faced an awkward situation because there was no market for their products. So as NVIDIA developed, they not only created new technologies but also had to create the market for them (the specifics of how they created the market were not entirely clear).

3. **Early Indicators of Future Success (E-I-O-F-S)**

The host mentioned that whenever a new market emerged, it seemed like NVIDIA was already waiting under the apple tree, ready for the apples to drop. How does NVIDIA manage to do this?

From Jensen's perspective, they don’t specifically focus on which technologies will definitely have a market. They care about whether something is important, whether a technology is important to the world, whether it is difficult to develop, and whether they are the only ones capable of doing it. If they don’t work on it, will it have an impact on the world? If the answer is yes, they will invest their energy in it. Internally at NVIDIA, they call this E-I-O-F-S (Early Indicators of Future Success). He also pointed out that this is different from KPIs. KPIs are outcomes, not indicators.

4. **Role of the CEO in a Company**

At NVIDIA, anyone can email Jensen with what they believe are the five key issues. In other words, NVIDIA practices a flat management structure. Why did they choose this approach?

First, the old hierarchical management style is outdated, originating from feudal times. This kind of structure was designed so that lower-level soldiers wouldn’t think for themselves and would simply march to their deaths. But the work they do today is different, the times are different, so why keep that old system? By adopting this management style, Jensen aims to create an environment at NVIDIA where their talented employees can fully utilize their abilities. In Jensen’s view, this is the CEO’s duty—as long as, during the hiring process, the employees are reliable. Of course, this is just my own interpretation.

### Personal Reflections

At NVIDIA’s lowest point, the stock price dropped by 80%, and Jensen had to do things he was very reluctant to do, facing the public. But when he looks back on it, what he could do at the time was just continue with his daily work. He focused on identifying the most critical issues and then invested enough energy into them.
